[charts] Simplify custom components creation (#9561)
mui/mui-x: docs/data/charts/components/components.md

---
title: Charts - Custom components
---

# Charts - Custom components

<p class="description">Creating custom charts components can be simplified with some data manager.</p>

## Introduction to scale

### Drawing area

Charts dimensions are defined by a few props:

- `height` and `width` for the `<svg />` size. If not provided those values are derived from the container.
- `margin` for adding space between the `<svg />` border and the **drawing area**.

> We call **drawing area** the space available to plot data (scatter points, lines, or pie arcs).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The term **drawing area** refers the space available to plot data (scatter points, lines, or pie arcs).
```

If you want to make Vale happy

The `margin` is used to leave some space for extra elements, such as the axes, the legend, or the title.

You can use `useDrawingArea` hook into charts subcomponents to get the coordinate of the **drawing area**.

```jsx
import { useDrawingArea } from '@mui/x-charts';

const { left, top, width, height } = useDrawingArea();
```

{{"demo": "BasicBarDemo.js"}}

### Scales

Some charts, such as line, bar, and scatter do a mapping between their data and the drawing coordinates.

> This mapping is defined by [axes' properties](/x/react-charts/axis/) and represented by [`d3-scale` objects](https://github.com/d3/d3-scale).

Reviewer: What do you mean by "is defined by axes properties" ?

Author: the `xAxis` and `yAxis` definitions

Reviewer: Could you give me an example (and problably add it to the doc as well) ?
Because it's not obvious to me what this "mapping" is exactly.
I guess it's when properties like [the one described here](https://mui.com/x/react-charts/axis/#axis-data), but I think we could be more explicit on this page.

Author: I reworked this paragraph to have one example of what is a mapping, and another one to describe what is impacting it

Reviewer: Looks great !

> You can use `useXScale()` and `useYScale()` to get access to those scales.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can use `useXScale()` and `useYScale()` to access those scales.
```

> They both accept either a number to select the index of the axis to select.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Both accept either:
- a number to select the index of the axis to select
- a string to select an axis by its id.
```

or 

```suggestion
Both accept either a number (representing the index of the axis) or a string (representing the id of the axis).
```

Or a string to select an axis by its id.

The scale object is generated such that they map values to SVG coordinates.
You don't need extra work to take into account the drawing area.

> #### Value to position

Reviewer: I would be consistent and always you either position or coordinates (the most correct one if possible)

The `d3-scale` default method map from values to coordinates.
For example, you can get the `x=0` position as follow:

```jsx

> const bottomScale = useXScale(); // get the default Y scale

Reviewer: ```suggestion
const leftScale = useYScale(); // get the default Y scale
```

Not sure, but at least we need to be consistent with the line below

Author: And with the comment 🙈

const originePosition = leftScale(0);
```

{{"demo": "OrigineDemo.js"}}

#### Position to value

The `d3-scale` object allows you to convert a position to a data value with the `invert` method.

> In the next example, we draw two lines with different axis.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The next example contains two lines drawn different axis.
```

---
title: Charts - Custom components
---

# Charts - Custom components

> <p class="description">Creating custom chart components is made easier by hook.</p>

Reviewer 2: Isn't it multiple hooks that we expose? 🤔 
```suggestion
<p class="description">Creating custom chart components is made easier by hooks.</p>
```

## Introduction to scale

### Drawing area

Charts dimensions are defined by a few props:

- `height` and `width` for the `<svg />` size. If not provided those values are derived from the container.
- `margin` for adding space between the `<svg />` border and the **drawing area**.

The term **drawing area** refers to the space available to plot data (scatter points, lines, or pie arcs).
The `margin` is used to leave some space for extra elements, such as the axes, the legend, or the title.

You can use `useDrawingArea` hook into charts subcomponents to get the coordinate of the **drawing area**.

```jsx
import { useDrawingArea } from '@mui/x-charts';

const { left, top, width, height } = useDrawingArea();
```

{{"demo": "BasicBarDemo.js"}}

### Scales

Some charts, such as line, bar, and scatter do a mapping between their series' data and the SVG coordinates.

For example, a line chart series with a value of 36,725$ on the 6th of December 2022 could be mapped to coordinates (628, 514).

> And you can revert the operation.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This operation can be reversed.
```

> Coordinate with x=628 would be associated with the 6th of December 2022 and those with y=514 would be associated with value 36,725$.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Coordinate with x=628 would be associated with the 6th of December 2022 and y=514 would be associated with value 36,725$.
```

Those mappings depend on the dimensions of the SVG and the drawing area.
It also depends on the [axes' properties](/x/react-charts/axis/) such as the scale (linear, log, square root) and min/max values.

> All those data are available in the [`d3-scale` objects](https://github.com/d3/d3-scale).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
All that data is available in the [`d3-scale` objects](https://github.com/d3/d3-scale).
```

You can use `useXScale()` and `useYScale()` to access those scales.
Both accept either:

- a number to select the index of the axis to select.
- a string to select an axis by its id.

> The scale object is generated such that they map values to SVG coordinates.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The scale object is generated such that it maps values to SVG coordinates.
```

You don't need extra work to take into account the drawing area.

#### Value to coordinate

> The `d3-scale` default method map from values to coordinates.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The `d3-scale` default method maps from values to coordinates.
```

For example, you can get the `x=0` coordinate as follow:

```jsx
const xAxisScale = useXScale(); // get the default X scale

> const xOrigine = xAxisScale(0);

Reviewer 2: Is it a French "easter egg"? Or just a typo? 🤔 
```suggestion
const xOrigin = xAxisScale(0);
```

Author: Why should we chose between both 🙈

```

> {{"demo": "OrigineDemo.js"}}

Reviewer 2: Would the make sense renaming the demo as well 🙈

#### Coordinate to value

The `d3-scale` object allows you to convert a coordinate to a data value with the `invert` method.

The next example contains two lines drawn using different y-axes.

> By using `invert`, the value associated to the current mouse coordinate `y` can be recovered as follow:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
By using `invert`, the value associated with the current mouse coordinate `y` can be resolved as follows:
```
